IT BEARS REPEATING: 2020 has been ... less than awesome. And every day seems to bring a new horseman of the apocalyptic variety. But WIRED has a salve. For three Wednesdays, starting September 16, WIRED will feature conversations with the artists, scientists, entrepreneurs, and executives who are working to make things better. And it's free.

What: A livestream celebration of our third annual WIRED25 list

When: Wednesdays, September 16 (5–7:30 pm ET), 23 (noon–1:30 pm ET), and 30 (noon–1:30 pm ET).

Where: We, like the rest of the world, have moved online.

How: All WIRED25 livestream conversations are free to attend. Register here to join (and get the recipe for the WIRED25 signature cocktail plus a chance to hang out "backstage" and chat with speakers).

Who: Leaders shaping the future of science, technology, culture—and the planet. A few are listed below; for a full schedule, click here.

Sarah Friar, the CEO of Next Door, a shelter-in-place lifeline. Friar is also on the boards of Walmart and Slack.

Gabriela Cámara, chef-owner of San Francisco's Cala restaurant and Mexico City's Contramar, Itacate del Mar, and Tata Begó, joins Ghetto Gastro cofounders Jon Gray, Lester Walker, and Pierre Serrao to make some of their favorite quarantine recipes, while talking about the social justice issues that drive them.

Reed Hastings, Neflix cofounder and CEO.

Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

Audrey Tang, Taiwan's hacker digital minister, will talk about how her country—which was hit by the coronavirus early on, and has millions more citizens than New York state—stopped the spread and suffered only seven COVID-19 deaths.

Maria Ressa, the CEO and executive editor of the news site Rappler—and a critical voice for global press freedom globally. Ressa has made national headlines because she was recently convicted of “cyberlibel” in the Philippines; her news site is well known for its scrutiny of the Duterte administration.

Brie Larson, Elijah Allan-Blitz, and Van Jones will discuss The Messy Truth, their Emmy-nominated virtual-reality project that demonstrates how VR can be a tool for empathy.

Larson's director in Captain Marvel 2, Nia DaCosta, who directed and co-wrote the hotly anticipated Candyman, will talk about the upcoming movie, which promises to scare the bejeezus out of us come October 16th.

Arlan Hamilton and Katie Rae, venture capitalists who invest in, respectively, underrepresented entrepreneurs and capital-intensive, society-healing technologies, will help us rethink our collective investment priorities.
Then, for some pure WIRED pride and joy, we’ll talk to Lisa Piccirillo, who as a grad student at UT-Austin, solved the Conway knot problem in just one week. The famous problem had stumped her fellow mathematicians for 50 years. And, you’ll meet 17-year-old high school student Avi Schifmann, who built his own coronavirus tracker back in January and has since turned down millions of dollars in investment. Or the founders of the CTI League, a 1,500-member global emergency response team of volunteer hackers who are defending and neutralizing cybersecurity threats to hospitals and health care centers during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Join us for robust conversations about a healthier future: Browse the full schedule and register here.